>> Sreenivasan: ON THIS EDITION
FOR SATURDAY MAY 30:
OVER THE PAST 24 HOURS MORE THAN
4,000 MIGRANTS ARE RESCUED IN
THE MEDITERRANEAN SEA.
THE ECONOMIC IMPLICATIONS OF
REMOVING CUBA FROM THE U.S.
TERROR LIST.
AND IN OUR SIGNATURE SEGMENT,
FROM MEXICO-- HOW ONE ECONOMIC
SUCCESS STORY MIGHT BECOME A
MODEL FOR THE WHOLE COUNTRY.
>> 100 GRADUATES A YEAR FIND
JOBS IN MEXICO'S GROWING
AVIATION INDUSTRY.
AND THEIR KEY MARKET IS NORTH
AMERICA.
>> Sreenivasan: NEXT ON PBS
NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
FROM THE TISCH WNET STUDIOS IN
LINCOLN CENTER IN NEW YORK,
HARI SREENIVASAN.
>> Sreenivasan: GOOD EVENING AND
THANKS FOR JOINING US.
WE BEGIN WITH THE MASSIVE RESCUE
EFFORT AND GROWING HUMANITARIAN
CRISIS OFF THE COAST OF LIBYA.
THE ITALIAN COAST GUARD SAYS IT
HAS SAVED MORE THAN 4,200
MIGRANTS IN 22 SEPARATE OCEAN
RESCUE OPERATIONS OVER THE PAST
24 HOURS.
THE MIGRANTS ARE TRYING TO REACH
EUROPE, TO ESCAPE WAR, POVERTY
AND PERSECUTION IN AFRICA AND
THE MIDDLE EAST.
BUT SMUGGLERS ARE PUTTING THEM
ON SHIPS WHICH END UP STRANDED
IN ROUGH SEAS.
MORE THAN 78,000 MIGRANTS HAVE
REPORTEDLY REACHED EUROPEAN
SHORES SINCE JANUARY.
MOST ARE SCATTERED THROUGHOUT
ITALY AND GREECE.
WHILE THE BRITISH, BELGIAN,
IRISH AND GERMAN NAVIES HAVE
JOINED THE RESCUE OPERATION,
MOST ARE AGAINST A PROPOSED
QUOTA SYSTEM TO DISTRIBUTE THE
REFUGEES ACROSS EUROPE.
AN EARTHQUAKE THAT STRUCK OFF
THE COAST OF ONE OF JAPAN'S MOST
REMOTE ISLANDS WAS SO DEEP AND
SO POWERFUL IT SHOOK BUILDINGS,
STOPPED TRAIN SERVICE AND CUT
POWER TO PARTS OF TOKYO, 620
MILES NORTH OF THE EPICENTER.
THE QUAKE STRUCK 421 MILES DEEP,
BUT DID NOT TOUCH OFF A TSUNAMI.
NO ONE WAS HURT AND NO SERIOUS
DAMAGE WAS REPORTED.
TODAY THE U.S. IS ISSUING ITS
STRONGEST MESSAGE YET ON CHINA'S
EXPANSION INTO THE SOUTH CHINA
SEA.
DEFENSE SECRETARY ASH CARTER
CALLED FOR AN IMMEDIATE AND
LASTING HALT, TO STOP CHINA FROM
BUILDING AND OCCUPYING
ARTIFICIAL ISLANDS IN THE
HIGHLY-CONTESTED REGION.
THIS FOLLOWS NEWS THAT U.S.
SURVEILLANCE IMAGERY REPORTEDLY
SHOWS CHINA POSITIONING WEAPONS
ON ONE OF THE ISLANDS.
VIETNAM AND THE PHILIPPINES
CLAIM THEY HAVE MINERAL RIGHTS
THERE.
BUT SECRETARY CARTER SAYS CHINA
HAS ALREADY RECLAIMED MORE THAN
2,000 ACRES.
CARTER IS CALLING FOR A
DIPLOMATIC APPROACH, SAYING:"
THERE'S NO MILITARY SOLUTION"
TO THE LAND DISPUTE.
THE PENTAGON IS LAUNCHING A
HIGH-LEVEL INVESTIGATION INTO AN
ANTHRAX MIX-UP.
THE DEPARTMENT OF DEFENSE SAYS
IT ACCIDENTALLY SHIPPED LIVE
ANTHRAX TO 24-LABORATORIES IN 11
STATES AND TWO FOREIGN
COUNTRIES, POSSIBLY SOUTH KOREA
AND AUSTRALIA.
THE C.D.C. SAYS THE SAMPLES WERE
SUPPOSED TO HAVE BEEN KILLED,
BUT CONTAINED LIVE SPORES
INSTEAD.
OFFICIALS SAY THERE'S NO KNOWN
RISK TO THE GENERAL PUBLIC AND
AN EXTREMELY LOW RISK TO LAB
WORKERS.
MORE THAN 20 MILITARY PERSONNEL
ARE BEING MONITORED FOR ANTHRAX
EXPOSURE.
PAKISTAN HAS LAUNCHED A MAJOR
MANHUNT TO FIND THE GUNMEN WHO
DRESSED UP LIKE SECURITY
OFFICERS, HIJACKED TWO BUSES AND
KILLED 22 PASSENGERS.
ONE WITNESS SAID THE ATTACKERS
CAPTURED DOZENS OF PEOPLE, THEN
DIVIDED THEM UP BY ETHNICITY,
SHOOTING THE PASHTUNS, AND
LETTING THE OTHERS GO FREE.
TEXAS GOVERNOR GREG ABBOTT IS
PLANNING TO SIGN NEW GUN
LEGISLATION ALLOWING CITIZENS TO
OPENLY CARRY HANDGUNS IN PUBLIC
PLACES.
THE LEGISLATURE EASILY PASSED
THE BILL YESTERDAY, OVERTURNING
A BAN ON OPEN-CARRY THAT DATES
BACK TO THE CIVIL WAR.
IF ABBOTT SIGNS IT, TEXAS WILL
JOIN 44 OTHER STATES WHICH ALLOW
PEOPLE TO CARRY A HANDGUN EITHER
WHOLLY OR PARTIALLY VISIBLE IN A
BELT OR SHOULDER HOLSTER.
TEXAS GUN OWNERS WOULD ALSO BE
REQUIRED TO HAVE A GUN LICENSE
AND BE AT LEAST 21 YEARS OF AGE.
THE LAW WOULD TAKE EFFECT
JANUARY 1ST.
ANOTHER DEMOCRAT HAS LAUNCHED A
QUEST FOR THE 2016 PRESIDENTIAL
NOMINATION.
FORMER BALTIMORE MAYOR AND
MARYLAND GOVERNOR MARTIN
O'MALLEY ANNOUNCED HIS CANDIDACY
TODAY, POINTING TO NEW
LEADERSHIP AS A CAMPAIGN THEME.
A RECENT QUINNIPIAC UNIVERSITY
POLL OF DEMOCRATS NATIONWIDE
GAVE O'MALLEY ONE PERCENT
SUPPORT.
HILLARY CLINTON TOPPED THE FIELD
WITH 57%.
>> Sreenivasan: TONIGHT, ISIS IS
MAINTAINING CONTROL OF THE CITY
OF PALMYRA IN SYRIA.
NOW WE'RE LEARNING MORE ABOUT
HOW ISIS IS TREATING THE PEOPLE
OF PALMYRA.
FOR SOME INSIGHT WE ARE JOINED
VIA SKYPE FROM ISTANBUL BY ANNE
BARNARD OF THE "NEW YORK TIMES."
SO THIS WAS THE FIRST CITY THAT
ISIS TOOK CONTROL OF FROM THE
SYRIAN GOVERNMENT.
HAVE THEIR TACTICS CHANGED IN
WHAT THEY DO WHEN THEY GET INTO
TOWN?
>> WELL, IT SEEMS THERE'S A
CERTAIN SET OF STEPS THAT ISIS
HAS HONED DURING THE TWO YEARS
IT STARTED TO ACCUMULATE
TERRITORY IN IRAQ AND SYRIA.
THEY COME IN.
THEY CARRY OUT SOME
WELL-PUBLICIZED ATROCITIES --
BEHEADINGS, ATTACKING PEOPLE WHO
THEY THINK MIGHT OPPOSE THEM AND
TRY TO COURT FAVOR WITH SOME
OTHER POPULATIONS AND ALTERNATE
BETWEEN THE TWO.
NOW, THIS IS THE FIRST TIME THAT
THEY'VE TAKEN A TOWN FROM THE
GOVERNMENT AND NOT FROM
INSURGENTS WHO HAD TAKEN IT
PREVIOUSLY.
SO STRANGELY, HERE, THEY DON'T
EXPECT TO HAVE A RIVAL FOR THE
ANTIGOVERNMENT MANTLE, SO TO
SPEAK.
SO SOME PEOPLE ARE SURPRISED
THAT THEY HAVE NOT BEEN HARSHER
WITH THE GENERAL POPULATION,
ESPECIALLY SINCE PALMYRA IS A
PLACE THAT MADE ITS LIVING OFF
THE TOURIST TRADE AND WAS QUITE
OPEN WITH THE WEST.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU SAID
BESIDES THE BEHEADINGS AND
EXECUTIONS, THEY'RE TRYING TO
TAKE ON MUNICIPAL MATTERS,
TURNING ON THE WATER AND FUEL.
>> ONE OF THEIR GOALS IS TO
CONVINCE PEOPLE THAT THEY REALLY
ARE A STATE, AND THAT THEY CAN
TAKE OVER INSTITUTIONS AND
FACILITIES AND PROVIDE SERVICES.
SO WITHIN HOURS OF COMING
TOWN, THEY HAD EXECUTED PEOPLE
PUBLICLY IN THE STREETS.
AT THE SAME TIME, THEY WERE
TRYING TO CARRY OUT VERY
ORDINARY FUNCTIONS-- OPENING THE
BAKERIES, GIVING BREAD FOR FREE,
AND FIXING THE POWER PLANT AND
THE WATER PUMPS WHICH HAD BEEN
LEFT NOT WORKING BY SOLDIERS.
TRAIMENT, BOMBING STARTED, SO
SERVICES HAVE BEEN COMING IN AND
OUT.
>> Sreenivasan: THE PEOPLE OF
PALMYRA ARE CAUGHT IN A BIT--
BETWEEN A ROCK AND A HARD PLACE.
ON THE ONE HAND, IF THEY
DON'T COOPERATE WITH ISIS, THEY
COULD MEET WITH DEATH.
AND ON THE OTHER HAND, REALLY,
IT'S THE GOVERNMENT THAT THEY
DON'T FEEL A TREMENDOUS LOYALTY
TO, ANYWAY.
>> YEAH.
I MEAN, LIKE EVERYWHERE IN
SYRIA-- I VISITED PALMYRA A YEAR
AGO, SO WE GOT TO KNOW A LOT OF
PEOPLE THERE.
THERE'S CERTAINLY A RANGE OF
SENTIMENT ABOUT THE
GOVERNMENT FROM PRO TO ANTI.
BUT PALMYRA WAS A PLACE WHERE
THERE WAS A LOCAL REBELLION THAT
WAS PUT DOWN IN 2012.
IT'S AN ALMOST ENTIRELY SUNNI
TOWN WHERE THE SECURITY FORCES
HAD NEVER FELT EXTREMELY
COMFORTABLE, ESPECIALLY THOSE
THAT WERE FROM OTHER PARTS OF
THE COUNTRY.
THEY TOLD US A YEAR AGO THAT
THEY FELT THAT THE PEOPLE-- THEY
COULDN'T TRUST THE LOCAL PEOPLE.
SO THERE DEFINITELY WAS
ANTIGOVERNMENT SENTIMENT THERE.
>> Sreenivasan: IS THERE
FEELING AMONG SOME PEOPLE ON THE
GROUND THAT ISIS COULD BE A
VIABLE ALTERNATIVE TO THE SIR
YOON GOVERNMENT?
>> WELL, I ASKED A GUY WHO SAY
LONGTIME ANTIGOVERNMENT ACTIVIST
THERE.
HE DOESN'T REALLY LIKE ISIS.
HE HAS SOME RELATIVES WHO ARE IN
ISIS.
HE SAID THAT HE WAS REMAINING
OPPOSED TO BOTH ISIS AND THE
GOVERNMENT.
HE SAID, "PEOPLE DON'T REALLY
HAVE A CHOICE.
THEY CAME INTO TOWN AND IT WAS
IMPOSED UPON THEM."
>> Sreenivasan: ARE THE AIR
STRIKES BY THE SYRIAN GOVERNMENT
MAKING THE ISLAMIC STATE'S CASE
FOR THEM?
>> WELL, YES.
PEOPLE WERE VERY AFRAID OF ISIS
WHEN THEY CAME IN, AND THEIR
MAIN FOCUS OF THE EXECUTIONS IN
STREETS, AND WHETHER THEY WERE
GOING TO TREAT THE POPULATION
HARSHLY.
NOW, THERE'S NEARLY DAILY AIR
STRIKES.
PEOPLE ARE REPORTING HAVING LOST
FRIENDS IN THE AIR STRIKES,
INCLUDING GOVERNMENT EMPLOYEES,
PEOPLE THAT MIGHT HAVE BEEN
PRO-GOVERNMENT.
I THINK NOW PEOPLE'S IMMEDIATE
SOURCE OF FEAR AND WORRY HAS
SHIFTED FROM THE MILITANTS ON
THE GROUND TO THE WARPLANES THAT
ARE OVERHEAD.
AT THE SAME TIME THEY'RE KEEPING
AN EYE ON WHETHER THEY WILL
START TO APPLY SOME OF ITS HARSH
PRACTICES TO THE GENERAL
POPULATION.
>> Sreenivasan: ALL RIGHT,
ANNE BARNARD, THANKS FOR JOINING
US.
>> THANK YOU.
>> Sreenivasan: IN TONIGHT'S
SIGNATURE SEGMENT, WE VISIT ONE
OF THE WORLD'S LARGEST
ECONOMIES, MEXICO.
OVER THE PAST GENERATION EXPORT-
DRIVEN GROWTH HAS FUELED THE
NATION'S RAPID RISE-- FAVORABLE
TRADE DEALS AND PROXIMITY TO
U.S. CONSUMERS HAS MEANT NEW
FACTORIES AND NEW JOBS.
THERE HAVE BEEN CHALLENGES,
NOTABLY THE DRUG TRADE AND A
STUBBORNLY HIGH POVERTY RATE.
AND SINCE WE ORIGINALLY BROUGHT
YOU THIS PIECE LAST YEAR,
MEXICO'S ECONOMIC FORTUNES HAVE
BECOME INCREASINGLY COMPLEX.
NEWSHOUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
MARTIN FLETCHER HAS THAT STORY.
>> WE'VE IDENTIFIED 25 MURDERS.
>
>> Reporter: WHEN IT COMES TO
MEXICO, THE NEWS IS OFTEN OF
DRUG CARTELS, VIOLENCE, ILLEGAL
IMMIGRATION.
> MORE THAN 4,000 PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN KILLED...
>> THE BORDER IS NOT SECURE.
BUT THERE'S ANOTHER STORY IN
MEXICO-- AMERICA, OF COURSE HAS
LONG BEEN A MAGNET FOR MEXICAN
WORKERS, BUT MORE AND MORE JOB
SEEKERS ARE COMING HERE TO THE
STATE OF QUEREÉTARO.
IT'S ONE OF MEXICO'S SMALLER
STATES, ABOUT AN HOUR'S DRIVE
FROM THE CAPITAL.
IT'S A RELATIVELY CRIME-FREE
AREA.
SOCIALLY, POLITICALLY IT'S BEEN
STABLE FOR A LONG TIME, AND MORE
AND MORE INTERNATIONAL COMPANIES
ARE FLOCKING HERE.
OF ALL THE CITIES IN THE WORLD,
THIS SMALL MEXICAN TOWN HAD THE
HIGHEST GROWTH IN FOREIGN DIRECT
INVESTMENT IN 2013-- THAT'S
MONEY INVESTED DIRECTLY INTO
LOCAL BUSINESS.
AND ITS POPULATION IS GROWING
RAPIDLY TOO.
WITH ITS COLONIAL CENTER, A
UNESCO WORLD HERITAGE SITE, AND
ITS NEW INDUSTRIAL PARKS, THE
POSTER CHILD FOR MEXICO'S
BURGEONING NEW ECONOMY IS HERE
IN QUEREÉTARO.
OSCAR AGUILAR, A LOCAL
JOURNALIST, REPORTS ON THE
GROWTH OF THE TOWN, AND THE
COMPANIES INVESTING HERE.
>> BOMBARDIER, AMERICAN
AIRLINES, AEROMEXICO, SAMSUNG,
HONDA.
>> Reporter: SIEMENS, GENERAL
ELECTRIC AS WELL.
>> YES, YES.
>> Reporter: SO THIS MEANS A LOT
OF JOBS FOR THE PEOPLE?
>> A LOT.
>> Reporter: THOSE NEW JOBS ARE
ATTRACTING MEXICANS SEEKING
STABILITY AND SAFETY, LIKE
AGUILAR HIMSELF.
HE WAS A JOURNALIST IN THE STATE
OF SINALOA, 700 MILES AWAY,
UNTIL...
>> THE TEAMMATE THAT I HAD DIED
BECAUSE OF THE DRUG DEALERS.
>> Reporter: HOW DID HE DIE?
>> THEY ARRIVED INTO THEIR
HOUSE, THEY BROKE INTO THEIR
HOUSE AND SHOT HIM INTO THE
HEAD.
HIM, HIS WIFE, HIS TWO
DAUGHTERS, AND THE TWO GRANDMAS
THAT WERE LIVING THERE.
I SAID NO I DON'T, I AIN'T GONNA
EXPOSE MY LIFE.
>> Reporter: HE MOVED TO
QUEREÉTARO WITH HIS WIFE ANEL
AND DAUGHTER, TAMMY.
>> HOW WAS YOUR DAY?
GIVE ME MY KISS.
MY KISS.
GOOD.
QUERETARO MEANS A TOWN THAT GAVE
ME A JOB, GAVE ME STABILITY, AND
GAVE ME AN OPPORTUNITY TO GROW
WITH MY FAMILY.
>> Reporter: SAFELY?
>> SAFELY.
>> Reporter: LAST YEAR THE
MURDER RATE IN MEXICO DECLINED
FOR THE THIRD STRAIGHT YEAR,
THOUGH IT'S BELIEVED THAT SINCE
2006 AT LEAST 70,000 PEOPLE HAVE
BEEN KILLED IN MEXICO'S DRUG
WARS.
BUT QUEREÉTARO, DEEP IN THE
COUNTRY'S INTERIOR, HAS BEEN
RELATIVELY UNTOUCHED.
IT HAS ONE OF THE LOWEST MURDER
RATES IN THE COUNTRY.
AND NOW A NEW GOVERNMENT REFORMS
AIM TO BRING ECONOMIC STABILITY
AND SAFETY BEYOND SMALL POCKETS
LIKE QUEREÉTARO, AND EXTEND THEM
TO MEXICO'S 120 MILLION PEOPLE.
MEXICAN FINANCE SECRETARY LUIS
VIDEGARAY.
>> PERHAPS NO OTHER COUNTRY HAS
HAD SUCH A SUCCESSFUL YEAR AS WE
DID LAST YEAR IN TERMS OF
CHANGING THINGS IN THE MEXICAN
ECONOMY: IN ENERGY,
TELECOMMUNICATIONS, THE FISCAL
FRONT, FINANCIAL REFORM.
WE DID MANY THINGS THAT BETTER
THE PROSPECTS OF GROWTH FOR
MEXICO.
>> Reporter: MANUFACTURING IS
BOOMING, ESPECIALLY FOR EXPORT.
TAKE THE AUTO INDUSTRY.
THIS APRIL, FORD AND TOYOTA SAID
THEY WOULD EXPAND THEIR
MANUFACTURING OPERATIONS IN
MEXICO.
SO FAR THIS YEAR, AUTO COMPANIES
HAVE ANNOUNCED $5.5 BILLION IN
PLANT EXPANSION AND
CONSTRUCTION.
AND IN 2013, MEXICO'S 48-YEAR-
OLD PRESIDENT ENRIQUE PEÑA NIETO
BEGAN HIS TERM OF OFFICE WITH A
DRAMATIC SERIES OF REFORMS TO
OPEN UP THE MEXICAN ECONOMY EVEN
MORE.
IN THE ENERGY SECTOR, PEÑA NIETO
BROKE THE 75-YEAR STATE OIL
MONOPOLY WITH A CONSTITUTIONAL
AMENDMENT ALLOWING PRIVATE
COMPANIES TO INVEST IN THE
INDUSTRY.
ON EDUCATION, THE GOVERNMENT
BROKE THE TEACHER UNION'S HOLD
ON SCHOOL STAFFING BY PASSING A
BILL TO STOP THE SALE AND
INHERITANCE OF TEACHING JOBS.
AND FOR THE BROADER ECONOMY,
PEÑA NIETO AND HIS ALLIES
INCREASED COMPETITION BY PASSING
NEW TAX AND BANKING REFORMS.
THE PRESIDENT HOPES HIS REFORMS
WILL BRING MORE SUCCESS STORIES
LIKE THAT OF BOMBARDIER, THE
CANADIAN COMPANY THAT MAKES THE
LEARJET.
THEIR FACILITY IS JUST A 30
MINUTE DRIVE FROM THE CENTER OF
BOOMTOWN QUEREÉTARO.
>> IN 2005 THERE WAS NOTHING
HERE.
IT WAS A GREEN FIELD.
>> Reporter: BOMBARDIER INVESTED
HALF A BILLION DOLLARS IN THIS
DIVISION IN QUEREÉTARO.
WHEN WE VISITED LAST YEAR, THE
COMPANY'S 45 EMPLOYEES HAD GROWN
TO 1,800.
TWO DOZEN MORE AVIATION
COMPANIES JOINED THEM IN THE
AREA.
AND AT THE TIME, ELEMENTS OF THE
NEW LEARJET 85 WERE MEANT TO BE
BUILT HERE IN QUERETARO.
>> WE'RE MANUFACTURING FROM HERE
TO HERE, WHICH IS THE FRONT
FUSELAGE, AND WE'RE
MANUFACTURING AROUND FROM HERE
TO HERE, WHICH IS THE AFT
FUSELAGE, AND WE WILL DO THE
WINGS ASSEMBLY TOO.
>> Reporter: BUT IN A SIGN OF
HOW RELIANT MEXICO'S ECONOMY IS
ON THE OUTSIDE WORLD, BOMBARDIER
ANNOUNCED THIS JANUARY IT WOULD
SHELVE THE LEARJET 85 PROJECT
AND LAY OFF EMPLOYEES HERE IN
QUERETARO.
EARLIER THIS YEAR, THE
INTERNATIONAL MONETARY FUND
LOWERED ITS GROWTH EXPECTATIONS
FOR MEXICO'S OVERALL ECONOMY ON
WEAK DEMAND.
AND ANALYSTS LIKE S&P CAPITAL'S
JOYDEEP MUKHERJI SAY THE DRUG
TRADE STILL LOWERS MEXICO'S
G.D.P. GROWTH BY ABOUT ONE
PERCENTAGE POINT.
>> MEXICO IS ENJOYING A BOOM IN
CERTAIN SECTORS.
BUT WHEN YOU STEP BACK AND LOOK
AT THE REST OF THE COUNTRY, YOU
SEE A VERY DIFFERENT STORY.
SO IT'S KIND OF A TWO PART STORY
GOING ON NOW IN MEXICO.
>> Reporter: STILL, THERE ARE
HOPES THAT PRESIDENT PENA
NIETO'S GOVERNMENT WILL BE ABLE
TO PUT ITS AMBITIOUS ECONOMIC
REFORMS INTO ACTION FOR THE
ENTIRE ECONOMY.
THOSE REFORMS YOU'RE MENTIONING
HAVE BEEN SIGNED INTO LAW, BUT
HAVE YET FOR THE MOST PART TO BE
IMPLEMENTED.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
>> Reporter: AND THE DISTANCE
FROM SIGNING A PIECE OF PAPER TO
IMPLEMENTING THEM IS A LONG WAY.
>> WELL REFORM IS CHANGE, AND
THERE'S ALWAYS RESISTANCE TO
CHANGE.
>> Reporter: ALREADY THE
TEACHER'S UNION HAS LAUNCHED A
SERIES OF BITTER PROTESTS,
WHILE ANALYSTS, LIKE POLITICAL
SCIENTIST DENISE DRESSER -
BELIEVE THE BILLIONAIRE LEADERS
OF INDUSTRY WILL NOT EASILY GIVE
UP THEIR POWER.
>> WHAT PEÑA NIETO WOULD LIKE TO
SEE IS A MORE COMPETITIVE, LEVEL
PLAYING FIELD FORM OF ECONOMIC
DEVELOPMENT.
BUT THE VESTED INTERESTS ARE
VERY STRONG.
AND THOSE VESTED INTERESTS ARE
NOT GOING TO GIVE UP WITHOUT A
FIGHT.
>> Reporter: CAN PEÑA NIETO
CARRY OUT HIS REFORMS?
WHAT IS SURE IS THAT HE IS
DEFLECTING MEXICO'S NARRATIVE
AWAY FROM THIS, THE DRUG WAR.
TO PARTLY THIS.
>> PEPSI ANNOUNCING PLANS TO
INVEST $5 BILLION IN MEXICO.
FROM DRUGS AND THUGS TO
MANUFACTURING HUBS.
THAT'S THE STORY THE GOVERNMENT
WANTS TO TELL.
AND THERE'S A LOT OF TRUTH IN
THE STORY OF MEXICO'S INDUSTRIAL
GROWTH.
DEMAND FOR MEXICAN-MADE GOODS
HAS HELPED DRIVE THE
MANUFACTURING SECTOR IN THE
COUNTRY.
MEXICO'S TRADE WITH THE UNITED
STATES AMOUNTS TO HALF A
TRILLION DOLLARS A YEAR, AND
BOTH SIDES WANT THAT TO GROW.
MEXICO'S ALREADY AMERICA'S THIRD
LARGEST TRADING PARTNER AFTER
CANADA AND CHINA.
AND MEXICO'S ADVANTAGES OVER
CHINA ARE CLEAR-- IT'S CLOSER,
SO HAS LOWER TRANSPORT COSTS.
AND ITS LABOR COSTS ARE STATIC,
WHILE CHINA'S ARE GROWING.
AND IT'S NOT JUST FACTORIES THAT
ARE GROWING HERE.
>> THIS IS JUST HALF OF THE
PROJECT.
BACK IN QUERETARO, ROBERT IBAÑEZ
MANAGES A GROWING, STATE-OF-THE-
ART BUSINESS PARK, HELPING PUT A
NEW FACE ON MEXICO, ENCOURAGING
COMMERCIAL INVESTORS.
>> WE HAVE A COMMERCIAL CENTER
IN HERE, WE HAVE TWO HOTELS.
>> Reporter: TWENTY-FOUR
COMPANIES RENT SPACE HERE, HALF
FROM OVERSEAS.
>> I HAVE PEPSI COLA, ERICSSON,
I HAVE AXA INSURANCE COMPANY.
>> Reporter: 1,800 PEOPLE WORK
HERE, AND GROWING FAST.
>> I AM GOING TO BUILD NINE MORE
BUILDINGS.
>> Reporter: AND HOW MANY OF
THOSE BUILDINGS HAVE ALREADY
BEEN RENTED OUT?
>> THREE.
I ALREADY HAVE THREE RENTED.
>> Reporter: STILL, SKILLED
LABOR IS KEY TO MEXICO'S
CONTINUED GROWTH.
SO QUEREÉTARO'S LEADERS
ESTABLISHED AN AERONAUTICAL
UNIVERSITY IN A VAST HANGAR NEXT
TO THE CITY'S AIR FIELD, LESS
THAN A MILE FROM BOMBARDIER.
ALL ITS EMPLOYEES TRAINED HERE.
100 GRADUATES A YEAR FIND JOBS
IN MEXICO'S GROWING AVIATION
INDUSTRY.
AND THEIR KEY MARKET IS NORTH
AMERICA.
THIS THE STUDENTS' FIRST EXAM
AFTER THREE WEEKS OF SCHOOL.
THE PLANE SHOULD STAY IN THE AIR
FOR FOUR SECONDS.
IT'S A WORK IN PROGRESS, LIKE
THE MEXICAN ECONOMY.
>> Sreenivasan: NOW ONLINE: MORE
ON THE HUMANITARIAN CRISIS AT
SEA.
SEE PHOTOS OF THE MIGRANTS
FLEEING THE MIDDLE EAST WHO WERE
RESCUED IN THE MEDITERRANEAN.
VISIT pbs.org/newshour.
>> Sreenivasan: YESTERDAY THE
STATE DEPARTMENT OFFICIALLY
LIFTED ITS DESIGNATION OF CUBA
AS A STATE SPONSOR OF TERRORISM.
IT'S ONE OF THE MANY RECENT
STEPS BY THE OBAMA
ADMINISTRATION TO RE-ESTABLISH
DIPLOMATIC TIES BETWEEN THE
ISLAND NATION AND THE UNITED
STATES.
HERE TO TALK ABOUT THE
IMPLICATIONS OF THAT MOVE IS
CARLA ROBBINS, AN ADJUNCT SENIOR
FELLOW AT THE COUNCIL ON FOREIGN
RELATIONS.
SO, FIRST OF ALL, THIS WAS ON
THE LIST SINCE THE EARLY 80s.
WHAT PUT THEM ON THIS LIST OF
STATE-SPONSORED TERROR IN THE
FIRST PLACE?
>> EXPORTING REVOLUTION, COZY
RELATIONS WITH THE TERRORISTS
AND WE DIDN'T LIKE THEM.
>> AND NOW IF THEY'RE OFF THIS
LIST WHAT DOES IT MEAN?
>> IT MEANS, MORE THAN ANYTHING
ELSE, THAT U.S. BANKS CAN HAVE
RELATIONS WITH CUBAN BANKS,
WHICH WILL MAKE IT MUCH EASIER
TO FOLLOW THROUGH ON THE EASING
OF FINANCIAL RELATIONS THAT
OBAMA IS PROMOTING, AND THE
CUBANS SAID IT WAS THE BIGGEST
PRECONDITION FOR REESTABLISHING
DIRECT DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS AND
OPENING THE EMBASSIES.
>> Sreenivasan: IN A PRACTICAL
MATTER, THIS MEANS IF A TOURIST
IS VISITING CUBA, THEIR A.T.M.
CARDS OR CREDIT CARDS WILL WORK.
>> THAT'S THE IDEA.
RIGHT NOW, MASTERED CARD IS
THERE.
I BELIEVE AMERICAN EXPRESS IS
BUT YOU CAN'T-- THERE'S NO
AMERICAN BANK THAT CAN DO IT
BECAUSE OF FEAR THAT THE
TREASURY DEPARTMENT WILL PUNISH
YOU.
YOU KNOW, THESE TERRORISM LISTS,
PARTICULARLY SINCE 9/11, I MEAN,
U.S. BANKS HAVE BEEN PAYING
VERY, VERY HIGH PENALTIES FOR
IT.
NOW YOU'LL BE ABLE TO DO THAT.
MORE THAN ANYTHING, WHILE THE
EMBARGO IS STILL IN PLACE AND
WILL REMAIN IN PLACE FOR A VERY
LONG TIME, I SUSPECT, YOU CAN DO
BUSINESS WITH PRIVATE BUSINESSES
IN CUBA, A VARIETY OF OTHER
TRADE.
WE CAN SELL MEDICINES.
WE CAN SELL AGRICULTURE.
WE HAVE BEEN ABLE TO DO THAT FOR
QUITE A WHILE, BUT THE CUBANS
HAD TO PAY BEFORE.
THEY HAD TO SEND THE MONEY HERE,
COULDN'T DO IT THROUGH AN
AMERICAN BANK.
IT WAS A VERY COMPLICATED
PROCESS.
NOW THEY'LL BE ABLE TO CLEAR
CHECKS IN CUBA AND THAT'S A BIG
DEAL.
THERE WON'T BE A HUGE GOLD RUSH
HERE BUT IT WILL BE EASIER TO DO
FINANCIAL TRANSACTIONS.
>> Sreenivasan: YOU POINTED
OUT DISTINCTION THAT THIS DOES
NOT MEAN THE EMBARGO WILL BE
LISTED.
>> THE EMBARGO WAS AN EXECUTIVE
ORDER SINCE KENNEDY ALL THE
WAY THROUGH TO CLINTON.
IT WAS WRITTEN INTO LAW DURING
THE CLINTON ADMINISTRATION.
NOT THE BEHEST OF THE WHO IS THE
REPUBLICANS PUSHED THROUGH IT.
AND NOW CONGRESS HAS TO AGREE TO
DO IT.
I WAS UP ON THE HILL AND I WAS
SURPRISED TO SEE NOBODY ON THE
HILL WAS GOING TO MAKE A BIG
FIGHT OVER THE LIFTING OF THE
TERRORISM LIST.
ON THE OTHER HAND, NOBODY IS
GOING TO PUSH VERY HARD TO LIFT
THE EMBARGO.
THIS IS A VERY LONG PROCESS.
>> Sreenivasan: AND THERE ARE
STILL SIGNIFICANT DISAGREEMENTS
THE TWO COUNTRIES HAD.
THE SECRETARY OF STATE SAID THAT
YESTERDAY.
THERE ARE ALSO MEMBERS OF
CONGRESS SAYING THAT.
>> HAVING DIPLOMATIC RELATIONS
DOESN'T MEAN WE LOVE THEM.
AND THEY HAVE VERY DIFFERENT
GOALS FOR THAT RAPPROCHEMENT.
OBAMA HAS BEEN CLEAR-- HIS GOAL
IS TO PROMOTE DEMOCRATIC CHANGE
IN CUBA.
THE CUBANS' GOAL FOR THIS IS TO
GET ENOUGH COMK BAILOUT SO THEY
CAN MAINTAIN THEIR REPRESSIVE
SOCIETY FOR A LITTLE BIG LONGER.
THE CASTRO BROTHERS ARE VERY
OLD, AND ULTIMATELY CUBA WILL
MOVE TOWARD SOME REFORMS AND AS
PRESIDENT OBAMA SAID, AFTER 50
YEARS, IT DIDN'T WORK.
>> Sreenivasan: WHEN THE TWO
COUNTRIES START TO ESTABLISH
EMBASSIES OFFICIALLY IN EACH
OTHER'S COUNTRIES WHAT, ARE THE
KIND OF STEPS WE'LL SEE TOWARDS
THE DIPLOMATIC
NORMALIZATION.
>> THE BIGGEST ISSUE RIGHT NOW--
AND WE DON'T KNOW HOW SOON THE
OPENING COULD COME, THE OFFICIAL
OPENING-- PROBABLY SOONER RATHER
THAN LATER-- THE BIGGEST
QUESTION I THINK IS WHAT THEY'VE
BEEN GOING BACK AND FORTH IS THE
CUBANS KEEP SAY, WE DON'T WANT
YOU TO BE USING THE EMBASSY TO
CONTINUE TO DO WHAT YOU'VE BEEN
DOING WHICH IS MEETING WITH
DISSIDENTS AND THE AMERICANS
KEEP SAYING, WHAT ARE YOU
TALKING ABOUT?
WE WANT TO DO THIS."
I HOPE THE OBAMA ADMINISTRATION
DOESN'T GIVE UP TOO MUCH ON
THAT.
THEY HAVE BEEN SIGNALING IN
OTHER AUTHORITARIAN SOCIETIES
THERE ARE RESTRICTIONS AND THERE
WILL BE RESTRICTIONS ON THE
CUBANS ITSELF.
>> Sreenivasan: CARLA ROBBINS,
THANKS SO MUCH.
>> Sreenivasan: BEFORE WE
LEAVE YOU TONIGHT, THE PRICE OF
EGGS HAS JUMPED 120% IN THE
MIDWEST WHERE THE AVIAN FLU
EPIDEMIC IS DEVASTATING FARMS.
IN IOWA ALONE, THE DISEASE IS
BLAMED FOR THE DEATHS OF ALMOST
30 MILLION CHICKENS SINCE
MID-DECEMBER.
FOR THE FIRST TIME IN SEVEN
YEARS, AMERICANS SAY THEY'RE
MORE PRO-CHOICE THAN PRO-LIFE.
A NEW GALLUP POLL SHOWS 50% OF
THOSE SURVEYED CONSIDER
THEMSELVES PRO-CHOICE, AND 44%
CONSIDER THEMSELVES PRO-LIFE.
THE BIGGEST SHIFT WAS AMONG
MIDDLE AGED AMERICANS.
THAT'S IT FOR THIS EDITION OF
PBS NEWSHOUR WEEKEND.
I'M HARI SREENIVASAN.
THANKS FOR WATCHING.